		IS is for Information Structure

SUMMARY: 

Here is an easy, simple system for building SCRUD apps on a LAMP
stack.

Briefly: In this system you put an information structure into a kind
of deep source file, then run 'make APP=Test' to generate all the
surface source code layers of SQL, PHP, JS and HTTP/JSON/etc. to
implement SQL SCRUD operations from the perspective of a web client
through client/server JS/PHP+MySQL.

You can use the generated, customized code bits to set up, maintain,
and interact with your database instead of writing your own PHP SQL
server and a client-side Javascript API to interact with each other to
carry out the SCRUD operations using your information structure.


INTRODUCTION:

SCRUD means: Search, Create, Read, Update, Delete.  These are the
operations needed for a records based database.  They enable making a
record of transactions, events, or history, as well as picking out
ones you want to look at, editing them, or deleting them.  

So it's pretty generally useful.

It is built on common infrastructure: a MySQL database available to
you on your server; a web server with PHP; and client systems able to
handle HTML and Javascript. You'll need 'make' and probably you'll be
on some unixish system.  That is, it's pretty universal. I hope to use
IS for an iOS/Android landlord phone-app, for a public dog names
database; one could use it in an IoT dashboard to build and use a
transaction history, I can't even think of all the things I could use
it for.  I bet you have several, and the cost in developer time is
what's held you back.  True in my case.  Below are Steps to Follow to
use this, as well as a breakdown of the files in this system, some
placeholders for future work, and further discussion about the design
and history.

Feel free to contact the author, Thomas C Veatch at his email,
first initial, middle initial, last name at g mail dot come.


STEPS TO FOLLOW:

So here's what you do.

  * Think about your application, give it a nice short punchy name
    like Dog or App.  Mine is called Test.

  * Make a list of the elements that will need to be in your standard
    record structure for each event or transaction.

  * Manually make a directory on your web server with your application
    name with the command line: % mkdir $(APP).

  * Then in ./Makefile change APP=Test replacing Test with your app's
    name, then run it (% make) to create all the js and php files
    inside the $(APP)/ directory.

  * In templates/is.php is a sample information structure which you
    can use to model your own which will be named $(APP)/$(APP).php
    
      * Either comment out the part of the Makefile that blows away
        ./$(APP)/$(APP).php by copying ./templates/is.php there, so
        you can just have your own there, or change the original
        is.php to suit your app's information structure, and let it
        copy it over each time you happen to run make.
	    
  * Your derived version of is.php will need some technical details,
    for each element of the standard record you have in mind for your
    application.  These include the kind of SQL table column data it
    will be represented by, what kind of HTML input type it will be
    shown as in the user interface, a size in case it is a string of
    some length, a default value, etc.  You should be able to figure
    it out by the examples, or email me with questions.

  * Then when you run 'make', it automatically uses the PHP's file
    rewriting capability to use the details in $(APP).php to fill out
    and customize the templates so that they work with your
    information structure in the various places they must: Javascript,
    SQL, an index page to start from and the final PHP IS CRUD (that's
    a joke, not an insult) server program that will be run on the
    server machine during a client call.

  * It will also auto-generate the SQL code that will create the
    database, table, and columns that are needed to support your
    particular information structure.  Run % $(APP)/$(APP).db without
    arguments to see what you can do with it. Do this and follow the
    resulting instructions to set up your database to have the
    information structure in a table in it.  Create user, then DB,
    then table; also, later on you may need to backup and/or restore
    your DB, and if your app evolves you may need to modify the table
    too; all these are explained so a person can do these things even
    though they may not know how to run MySQL through a CPanel UI or
    carry out all these steps in technical detail, as long as they
    aren't afraid to learn and willing to follow instructions. I
    consider myself the target audience; if it works for me it
    likely will work for you too.

  * There are some simpler test runs implemented in the makefile under
    make targets tc, tr, tu, td (Test * CRUD) on the same machine,
    using CURL.  I use them for a certain level of debugging.

  * I also debugged using the Chrome Developer Tools accessed in
    Chrome under the three vertical dots in the menu bar -> More Tools
    -> Developer Tools.   Very useful.


FILES:

Look at templates/*:
  is.php       a sample Information Structure, which governs the rest.
  isdb.php     generates MySQL instructions and code for setup,
  	       maintenance, and all the SCRUD ops.
  isphp.php    generates PHP server-side request-handlers for the IS SCRUD ops.
  isjs.php     generates a JS library with client-side functions that
  	       connect to the server to do IS SCRUD ops, and with UI
  	       modification functions that insert IS functionality
  	       onto a set of HTML divs.
  isindex.php: generates a sample index.php file to offer SCRUD on the
  	       given information structure.


FUTURE STEPS:

  x connect UI functions to server API calls.
  x Create/Delete the DB and Table as admin
  * Delete/re-Create the DB and Table as admin  
  x Run some Create + Updates to put stuff in the DB.
  * Run a backup, delete the whole DB, and restore cycle.
  * Do a derived app for Dog Names.
  * Another app: comments on ontheground.php
  * Another app: IOT monitoring dashboard from any device like a thermostat.
  * Another app: a social website.
  * Another app: PlayAlong
  * Think up more apps.


FURTHER DISCUSSION:

Let there be a certain information structure IS and its octopus arms through
   a web app's parts and its lifecycle through time.
   For web apps, it has to exist as octopus, i.e., be able to:
       exist in parallel in multiple computers and contexts: server DB & PHP; client JS & UI.
       circulate from one context to the other
     So we need a standard way to map representations from IS to each context,
       and software methods and execution to move them from source to recipient contexts
   Also it needs a healthy life cycle: a new structure element type
      needs to be made to exist in all the contexts: add an
      arm, modify an arm, remove an arm.
   DB backup is another part of the lifecycle.

Let an IS be a PHP associative array structure defining what's needed
to be known in the different places. (e.g., <?php $is=[a=>b,c=>d...];?>)
Key/value pairs in $is store the names of DB, Table, the columns in
the Table, user names, the URL and path to the app server programs, etc.

In IS how does client connect with server? For each CRUD operation
client-side JavaScript attaches widgets and an onsubmit function to a
FORM (isjs.php look for uTop). isindex.php provides minimal structures
to attach to.  isdb.php generates the database code. isphp.php
generates the server-side CRUD API handler.  

Then let a Makefile apply PHP itself to compile through, reading the
IS structure and mapping these template files written to be processed
with PHP so as to generate (=>) the following files (replace "APP"
with your app's name):

  templates/is.php => APP/APP.php The idea is to color in all the
      templates below with the information structure in (your derived
      version of) is.php, as follows:

  templates/isindex.php => APP/index.php: a client page with the
      beginnings of the CRUD UI.  This just creates a place to hang
      stuff, and the Javascript does almost all of the HTML work.

  template/isdb.php => APP/isAPP.db: provides instructions on how to
      create and maintain a changing database, both to CREATE anew and
      to MODIFY table for changes.  Also shows what SQL looks like,
      to do CRUD ops on the IS records on the server, so you know how
      to do them.

  template/isphp.php => APP/isAPP.php: PHP server-side API
      implementation, provides an (authenticated?) server API to those
      SQL CRUD operations on server's DB returning CRUD results to
      client.  It's middleware, between the client and the DB.
      
  templates/isjs.php => APP/isAPP.js: A JS library/function file that
      implements CRUD-related UI displays and a CRUD API to be called
      within the client and that makes the related server calls to the
      PHP API.  Enough UI is built to let user initiate a New,
      Search/Read, EDIT, and Delete and to use the JS API to make them
      happen through server requests and return data handlers.


RELATED WORK:

  Incidentally there's a thing out there called PHP-CRUD-API, but I'm
  not that smart and found it to be intimidatingly, and
  incomprehensibly complex and enormous, and I thought I'd spend more
  time figuring it out than writing my own, so here you go.  I did
  steal the idea from PHP-CRUD-API of using HTTP request methods
  (POST, GET, PUT, DELETE) as both synonyms for CRUD operations and as
  the means of communicating through HTTP which of the operations is
  being requested.  So it's not all POSTs with a JSON structure
  holding the operation in it.  Some of it is REST-ish like a GET with
  a URL suffixed with ?id=NNN to READ that number-identified record.
  Other operations do send JSON back and forth.

  Concisely, then, you might think of IS as a PHP implementation of a
  REST-ish API where the requested URL identifies the IS API itself
  (URL/PATH/APP/isAPP.php) and the request method specifies which of
  the CRUD ops is being requested, plus JSON where needed to transfer
  the CRUD data, if not simply appended to the URL.  Then client side
  JavaScript to build a minimum UI.


   That's the idea here.  January 12, 2020 work started. January 23
   there was some php self-rewriting templates for some of these
   parts, but nothing compiled, ran, or worked.  Just some ideas in
   perhaps the right direction.  February 2 it's now a tiny step past
   there, but I have used it to do all the CRUD operations through the
   UI and seen that they pop through into the database.  I can barely
   keep a straight face, declaring it to be an implementation of its
   specs, but it actually minimally kind of is, so that says it's time
   to include other people.  It'll move faster with many eyes on it.

   Therefore following the principle of release early, release often,
   I hereby open the Kimono and offer IS to you for use under my
   favorite license, the GPL.  Please try it, use it, find its
   limitations and help fix them, and please send any changes you make
   so that I can incorporate them into an improved version and release
   them to the world.

   Thank you!

   Tom

   Thomas C Veatch PhD
   tcveatch@gmail.com
   1-206-858-2633
